                              A dashboard for cq /

   Aug 17, 2026  --  11KB
   [1]#golang

Seeing cq work

   cq deliberately holds nothing durably. It is an execution engine, and a
   restart takes its state with it. That is a feature, not an oversight...
   it is what keeps the core dependency-free and lets it drop into a
   service without dragging infrastructure along behind it. If you need
   durability, you're expected to put it in front of cq: SQS, a database
   poller, RabbitMQ, a Redis list, whatever already owns the work. cq is
   the thing that executes the messages those transports hand it, not the
   thing that remembers them.

   But that leaves an obvious gap: while the process is up, a lot is
   happening that you cannot see. Jobs are retrying, backing off,
   rescheduling, racing each other for a lock, and the moment they finish,
   that history is gone.

   That kind of tracking is something you'd want anyway, transport in
   front or not. On most projects I end up building it by hand: a jobs
   table, maybe a job_attempts alongside it, a handful of columns for
   state, timing, error, attempt count, and a bit of code to keep them
   updated as work moves through. It's never the interesting part of the
   project, and it's always slightly different from the last time I wrote
   it. I still think that persistence belongs in the project, owned by
   you, close to your domain. The dashboard doesn't replace it. What it
   gives you is the visual layer on top: a window into the same lifecycle,
   without hand-rolling a UI over your own tables every time you want to
   actually look at what the queue is doing.

   I kept reaching for a way to watch it. Not a metrics pipeline, and not
   another database of record, just a window into what this particular
   process is doing right now and what it did a minute ago. So I built
   one: [2]cq-dashboard.

   It is a separate, optional module. It listens to cq's lifecycle hooks,
   writes them to a store, and serves views over the result. SQLite and
   Postgres ship in the box, and the store is a single interface, so
   anything else, MySQL, a document store, an in-memory fake for tests, is
   one implementation away. The core library keeps its zero-dependency
   promise because none of this lives inside it. If you never import the
   dashboard, cq is exactly what it was.

Hooks do the recording

   If you've read the [3]composition post, you already know the seam this
   plugs into. Hooks are the observational callbacks cq fires on enqueue,
   start, success, failure, discard, reschedule, and per-attempt events.
   They sit outside the execution path. The dashboard is really just a
   well-behaved consumer of those hooks.

   "Well-behaved" is the load-bearing part. cq invokes hooks synchronously
   on the goroutine running the job, so a hook that writes to a database
   directly would steal worker capacity every time a job changed state.
   You can spawn a goroutine inside a hook to push that work off the
   execution path yourself, but then ordering, backpressure, and shutdown
   all become your problem to get right.

   The dashboard's sink takes that off your plate. A hook never does I/O;
   it just drops the event onto a buffered channel and returns
   immediately. A separate writer goroutine drains that channel
   continuously and batches whatever it finds into the store. To be clear,
   this isn't a "save only once the buffer is full" arrangement, the
   writer is always draining as fast as it can keep up. The buffer is just
   slack for bursts. It only matters when events arrive faster than they
   can be written, and if it ever fills completely, events are dropped and
   counted rather than blocking the queue. A nonzero Dropped() means the
   history is incomplete, which is the honest price of never slowing
   execution down.

   Wiring it up is four pieces: a store, a sink that feeds it, your queue
   with the sink's hooks attached, and an HTTP handler.
// 1. Where history lives. A persistent volume, not /tmp.
st, _ := sqlite.Open("/var/lib/myapp/cq-dashboard.db")
defer st.Close()

// 2. The recorder. Start it before the queue, so no event is missed.
sk := sink.New(st, sink.WithRetention(24*time.Hour, time.Hour, store.StateComple
ted))
sk.Start(context.Background())

// 3. Your queue, unchanged except for two options.
queue := cq.NewQueue(2, 6, 128,
    cq.WithQueueName("default"),
    cq.WithHooks(sk.Hooks()),
    cq.WithMiddleware(sk.ProgressMiddleware("default")), // Optional: live progr
ess.
)
queue.Start()

// 4. The UI, mounted anywhere.
handler, _ := web.New("/cq", st, sk, web.WithQueues(queue))
http.Handle("/cq/", handler)

   Two options on a queue you already have, and a handler you mount
   wherever you like. That's the whole integration.

What it looks like

   The overview is the live view: queue stats read straight from cq per
   request, throughput for the last hour, the jobs in flight right now,
   and any recurring schedules with their next fire time.
   cq-dashboard overview page: live queue stats, throughput, in-flight
   jobs, and schedules cq-dashboard overview page: live queue stats,
   throughput, in-flight jobs, and schedules

   The jobs page is the history: every execution cq recorded, newest
   first, filterable by queue, attribute, and state. You can see retries
   (the 3 in the attempts column), live progress on the active importers,
   and the failed charge-card jobs sitting inline with their error.
   cq-dashboard jobs page: every execution recorded, filterable by queue,
   attribute, and state cq-dashboard jobs page: every execution recorded,
   filterable by queue, attribute, and state

   And the detail page is where a single logical job opens up: submission
   timings, the attributes you tagged it with, every retry attempt with
   its individual result and error, and the reschedule/release lineage
   collapsed into one chain.
   cq-dashboard job detail: per-attempt results, errors, and the
   reschedule/release lineage chain cq-dashboard job detail: per-attempt
   results, errors, and the reschedule/release lineage chain

   That last one is the view I wanted most. When a job that failed twice
   and succeeded on the third attempt is just one row that says completed,
   you've lost the interesting part. Here, upstream timeout, upstream
   timeout, then completed is right there, per attempt.

What it is not

   I want to be careful about this, because an observability tool is easy
   to mistake for something it isn't. The dashboard shows you what cq
   executed, and is executing right now. It is not a queue of record, not
   a transport, and not a dead-letter queue.

   That distinction has real consequences worth knowing before you lean on
   it:
     * Pending understates real backlog when something feeds cq. If jobs
       arrive from SQS, a database poller, or any other transport, cq only
       knows about the messages already pulled into memory. Ten thousand
       messages still waiting in SQS are invisible here. The dashboard
       answers "what is this process doing", not "how much work exists".
     * Failures are execution outcomes, not a dead-letter queue. A job
       that exhausts its transport's retries lands in that transport's
       DLQ, and that stays the record of work still needing redrive. The
       failures view shows the cq executions that led there... the
       attempts, the errors, the timings.
     * Retrying belongs to whatever owns the work. With a transport in
       front, that's the transport. For in-memory-only cq, StopDrain hands
       unstarted jobs back to your code at shutdown so you can persist and
       resubmit them.

   What the dashboard has that the layer above it does not: per-attempt
   retry history, wait time versus execution time, live progress from
   running jobs, reschedule and release lineage collapsed into one logical
   job, and which jobs a shutdown abandoned. That is the gap it fills, and
   I tried hard to make it fill only that gap.

The same views, as JSON

   The HTML pages are the default, but they aren't the only way out.
   WithJSON() serves the read views as JSON alongside the HTML, for a
   frontend of your own, a monitoring script, or a bit of curl in a
   terminal:
handler, _ := web.New("/cq", st, sk, web.WithQueues(queue), web.WithJSON())

   It's off unless you ask for it, and when it's off the routes aren't
   even registered, so a deployment that doesn't want a machine-readable
   surface has none to probe. That's the same instinct as the write
   controls: a capability you didn't opt into shouldn't exist as an
   endpoint to poke at. When you do turn it on, it adds three:
     * GET /cq/jobs.json -- A filtered page of history, with total, pages,
       and the window it was read against.
     * GET /cq/jobs/{key}.json -- One job with its attempts and reschedule
       lineage.
     * GET /cq/live.json -- Live queue state, pending jobs, schedules,
       stored counts, and sink health.

   These endpoints support the same functionality and filtering as the
   HTML views.

Nothing's locked by default

   The views expose job names, attributes, error strings, and so on:
   nothing is protected out of the box. There are a few ways to gate it:
     * WithLogin - Puts a styled sign-in form in front of every route,
       with the session in an HttpOnly, signed cookie, a real server-side
       sign-out, and failed attempts rate-limited and audited. Pass
       StaticPassword for a single shared login, or your own func(user,
       pass) (string, bool) to check against real accounts.
     * WithTokens - Registers header credentials (a bearer token for CI, a
       monitoring script, curl). Adding a token doesn't demand one,
       though... it only says how a caller may identify itself. WithLogin,
       or RequireSignIn for a token-only deployment, is what actually
       makes identity mandatory.
     * Already have sessions or SSO? An Authorizer is just a
       func(*http.Request) (subject, ok), so you wire the dashboard to the
       auth you already run rather than bolting a second system beside it.

   The same gate covers the JSON endpoints as well, and, an
   unauthenticated JSON request gets a 401, not a redirect to the sign-in
   form.

Getting the most out of it

   The dashboard can only show what your jobs tell cq. Three things make
   it dramatically more useful:
     * Name the job type, not the instance. cq.WithJobName("import-rows")
       -- without a name, every row reads "unnamed" and the grouped
       failures view has nothing to group on. Put identity in attributes,
       not the name.
     * Tag with attributes. cq.WithJobAttribute("tenant", id) is how you
       find a job later, and it's the closest thing to a payload the
       dashboard can show. Attributes are filterable from the jobs and
       failures pages.
     * Report progress. cq.SetProgress(ctx, ...) is what fills in those
       50% · importing lines, but only for jobs that call it, and only
       when the progress middleware is wired.

   The quickest way to see all of it is the demo, which generates its own
   traffic:
go run ./cmd/demo -addr :8080

   Every screenshot above is that demo running.

References

   1. /category/golang
   2. https://github.com/gnikyt/cq-dashboard
   3. file:///cq-why-composition
